About the museum : The National Museum, New Delhi, as we see it today, has an interesting beginning. The blueprint for establishing the National Museum in Delhi was prepared by the Maurice Gwyer Committee in May 1946. An Exhibition of Indian Art, consisting of selected artefacts from various museums of India was organized by the Royal Academy, London with the cooperation of Government of India and Britain. The Exhibition went on display in the galleries of Burlington House, London during the winter months of 1947-48. It was decided to display the same collection in Delhi, before the return of exhibits to their respective museums. An exhibition was organized in the the RashtrapatiBhawan (President's residence), New Delhi in 1949, which turned out to be a great success. This event proved responsible for the creation of the National Museum.

The success of this Exhibition led to the idea that advantage should be taken of this magnificent collection to build up the nucleus collection of the National Museum. State Governments, Museum authorities and private donors, who had participated in the exhibition, were approached for the gift or loan of artefacts, and most of them responded generously. (Click here to see the gifts from various donors to the National Museum).

On August 15, 1949, the National Museum, New Delhi, was inaugurated in the Rashtrapati Bhawan by Shri R.C. Rajagopalachari, the Governor-General of India. The foundation of the present building was laid by Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, the Prime Minister of India, on May 12, 1955. The first phase of the National Museumbuilding was formally inaugurated by Dr. SarvepalliRadhakrishnan, the Vice President of India, on December 18, 1960. The second phase of the building was completed in 1989.

While the Museum continued to grow its collection through gifts that were sought painstakingly, artefacts were collected through its Arts Purchase Committee. The Museum presently holds approximately 2,00,000 objects of diverse nature, both Indian as well as foreign, and its holdings cover a time span of more than five thousand years of Indian cultural heritage.

The National Museum was initially looked after by the Director General of Archaeology until 1957, when the Ministry of Education, Government of India, declared it a separate institution and placed it under its own direct control. At present, the National Museum is under the administrative control of the Ministry of Culture, Government of India.


1.Dancing girl of Harappa:   Dancing Girl is a prehistoric bronze sculpture made in lost-wax casting about c. 2300–1750 BC in the Indus Valley civilisation city of Mohenjo-daro (in modern-day Pakistan), which was one of the earliest cities. The statue is 10.5 centimetres (4.1 in) tall, and depicts a nude young woman or girl with stylized ornaments, standing in a confident, naturalistic pose. Dancing Girl is highly regarded as a work of art.

The statue was excavated by British archaeologist Ernest Mackay in the "HR area" of Mohenjo-daro in 1926, It is now in the National Museum, New Delhi; having been allocated to India at the Partition of India in 1947.
      
           Description: This is one of two bronze figures found at Mohenjo-daro that show more flexible features when compared to other more formal poses. The girl is nude, wears a number of bangles and a necklace and is shown in a natural standing position with one hand on her hip.She wears 24 to 25 bangles on her left arm and 4 bangles on her right arm, and some object was held in her left hand, which is resting on her thigh; both arms are unusually long. Her necklace has three big pendants. She has her long hair styled in a big bun that is resting on her shoulder.

2.Relics of Buddha:    The national museum at Delhi is home to the biggest collection of miniature paintings. A full gallery is devoted to these paintings and it would take you some time to go through all of them. You can see miniature paintings from various schools of miniature paintings like – Mughal Miniatures, Rajasthan Miniatures, Pahadi Miniatures and Deccani Miniatures.

3.Nataraja in Chola bronze:    The Chola bronze artefacts are more from Tamil Nadu side and are stored in Egmore Museum in Chennai and at Maratha Palace in Thanjavur. Especially relevant is the fact that the  National museum  is home to the Nataraja in chola bronze. Apart from that you can even have a look at some of the other bronze artefacts from India though you might have to roam around a bit for that.

Nataraja is a massive yet elegant statue represents Shiva, passionately engaged in ecstatic dance. This form of Shiva’s image is known as Nataraja in iconographic tradition, and the dance, as ‘Ananda-tandava.’

Perfected anatomical proportions and distinct features define the image of the great Lord. The sculpture was cast in bronze and anodized in deep copper tint, and it represents Shiva as the Lord of Dance.

It combines in a single image the great Hindu god Shiva’s roles as creator, preserver, and destroyer of the universe and conveys the concept of the never-ending cycle of time.

Shiva has many guises and many representations in art, but the most popular is as a dancing figure within the arch of flames, called Shiva Nataraja, Lord of the Dance. 

Nataraja is a depiction of the Hindu god Shiva as the cosmic ecstatic dancer. The pose and artwork are described in many Hindu texts, and the dance relief is featured in major Hindu temples of Shaivism.

It is an image seen in museums and temples across the world, and it is rich in iconography and hidden meaning.

Shiva’s dance is set within a flaming circle of fire. The god holds in his upper right hand, the act of creation, the hand drum that made the first sounds of creation.

His top left-hand holds the fire that will destroy the universe, representing the act of destruction. With his lower right hand, the action of protection, he makes the gesture that diminishes fear.

The figure being trampled by his right foot represents the illusion, which leads humanity astray. Shiva’s front left hand, pointing to his raised left foot, signifies refuge and release for the troubled soul.

The energy of his dance makes his hair fly to the sides.

Just like the art of medieval Europe, the art of India was devoted to the service of religion. The spiritual experience was enhanced by meditating on works of art.

This elegant bronze statue of Shiva in its original Temple location would have awed and inspired a Hindu devotee.

The three gods of the Hindu trinity are Brahma the Creator, Vishnu the Preserver, and Siva the Destroyer and Restorer.

The Tamil sculptors of the Chola dynasty (880–1279) realized Shiva, the Dancer in his most complete and graphic form and one which has become symbolic of Indian civilization.

Siva, as represented in this vital work of art, is perfectly poised and depicts Siva’s grace and majesty.

4.Ganjifa cards:   To all those who are fond of playing cards the Ganjifa cards are actually how are ancestors played the game. In those ages the cards were hand crafted and painted. Some of them are kept in the Decorative arts gallery there are a few which are stored with the miniature paintings.

Ganjifa cards are circular or rectangular,and traditionally hand-painted by artisans. The game became popular at the Mughal court, and lavish sets were made, from materials such as precious stone-inlaid ivory or tortoise shell (darbar kalam). The game later spread to the general public, whereupon cheaper sets (bazar kalam) would be made from materials such as wood, palm leaf, stiffened cloth or pasteboard. Typically Ganjifa cards have coloured backgrounds, with each suit having a different colour. Different types exist, and the designs, number of suits, and physical size of the cards can vary considerably. With the exception of Mamluk Kanjifa and the Chads of Mysore, each suit contains ten pip cards and two court cards, the king and the vizier or minister. The backs of the cards are typically a uniform colour, without patterning.


5.Ivory sculptures:    These sculptures are only few as the art was banned as it involved the killing of elephants. In any case  the National Museum is still home to some of such brilliant pieces. The decorative arts gallery is the place where all the miniature and giant items of ivory are kept.

The Ivory sculptors are limited in availability. The ivory trade was banned and the art form has more or less died. Thankfully, museums like this have a great collection of absolutely exquisite ivory items. In the Decorative Arts gallery, you can see miniature to giant items made of ivory. Some of my favorite pieces include

Dashavatar in Ivory – painted and sculpted
Ivory carved box
A home shrine made of carved ivory
Each piece appears extremely delicate – as if it will break if we touch it. However, they have been enduring for a long time. When you go there, tell me which one you like the most.

6.Alamkara collection Jwellery:    If you are also fond of the shining gold then there are multiple jewelry pieces available. There are nearly 250 pieces on display and each one is a sight to behold.
Alamkara is adornment and a body devoid of adornment is imperfect. But once decorated with beautiful ornaments, the body assumes form, becomes visible, attractive and perfect. National Museum has the most extensive collection of jewellery in India. The items on view here tell the story of Indian jewellery. From the beautifully tumbled agate bead necklaces of Mohenjodaro and Harappa, fabulous jewels adorned with images of gods and goddesses to the magnificent items that once reposed in the treasuries of the Mughal emperors and the maharajas, the collection spans important periods in Indian history. 


7.Tanjore paintings:   On the opposite, this is a relatively new gallery at the National Museum but it is just awesome. Depicting mythological stories these paintings come from Thanjavur and Mysore in South India. Some of the most interesting ones are the ones showing the marriage of Ram – Sita and Siva –Parvati.

This is a relatively new gallery but what a gallery. You see the opulent and colorful paintings from Thanjavur and Mysore in South India. Shiva and mythology are the main subjects of these paintings. Shiva as Nataraja and Krishna as butter-stealing babies are the most common themes seen in Tanjore Paintings. My favorite in this gallery is the painting that shows the two celebrated marriages from Ancient Indian literature – Shiva-Parvati Wedding and Ram-Sita Wedding. I have never seen another painting depicting this.

Another favorite is a single painting depicting the Shiv-Lila – with Nataraja on its top.
There are other unusual paintings like those of Vithobha or Panch-Mukhi Hanuman.


8.Wood carved doors:    Amidst the stone sculptures in the sculpture gallery you find a unique carved wooden door. Created in 14th CE this door is now showing signs of wear and tear.

The Wood Carving Gallery of the museum not only exhibits artefacts from India, but also from Nepal, Central India and Tibet. This gallery gives glimpses of India's wood carving tradition mainly belonging from 17th to 19th centuries illustrating the different styles of wood carvings from Rajasthan, Gujarat, Odisha and South India. Collections on display include decorative and utilitarian objects, architectural elements and sculptures. A square pillar with a capital of five feet height dated 9th century is the earliest wood carving specimen in National Museum. The gallery has been curated by  Anamika Pathak.

9. Miniature Paintings:   The Museum has the biggest collection of miniature paintings from across the country. The size of the miniature gallery and the number of paintings on display an indication of the same. The gallery is not very well organized either in the styles of paintings or themes. However, take my word, each of the miniature paintings here is a masterpiece.

Look for this miniature scroll-like painting that has the sacred map of Varanasi. I also like the self-portraits of some of the famous miniature painters next to the display that shows the tools and techniques of miniature paintings. Jain Mandalas look like complex mathematical equation.
The miniature painting gallery at the National Museum Delhi is the best place to admire and appreciate this art form. You can see miniature paintings from various schools of miniature paintings like – Mughal Miniatures, Rajasthani Miniatures, Pahadi Miniatures, and Deccani Miniatures. It is fun to see the subjects of these paintings that primarily focus on mythological themes and royal scenes. At times, they also document everyday life.

The creative use of small spaces to depict a lot is what we learn from these paintings. For example, a painting depicts 10 Sikh Gurus in the petals of a lotus flower.


